Little Lost Robot focuses on two main charaters, Susan Calvin and Peter Bogert who fly to an asteroid-based research facility to assist in tracking down a robot known as NS-2-10, or Nestor 10. Interestingly, this robot has hidden himself among a shipment of 62 otherwise identical NS-2 models, but he has a special feature that makes it imperative that he be identified and recovered.

There are several topics that I found quite intriguing; 
- To me there was a constant feeling within the text that that robots, as sentient beings, might resent their treatment by humans. The electrecution on humans to see if the robots would react made me quite uncomfortable because if the robots were manufactured to aid humands why are they testing them again? 
- The NS-2s are manufactured without the First Law which means that the Robots have the ability to harm humans through "inaction", for the entire part of the story the government hides such to avoid rejection of the public. Does this mean that the creators of Robots are the ones who control them and in turn allow them to control the greater societies? Who capitalizes in such situation?
- In the story the other Nestors don't yet know anything about physics because they're produced without that knowledge. This makes me curious to know if they can be educated, not by humans but by other more advanced robots.
- Towards the end the Nestor-10 was caught because of his own superiority complex in proving and trying to educate humans. Isn't this something similar that humans have? We can see that without one basic first law Robots try to mimic the superiority complex that humans have in educational spaces and workforces. Wannabe human?
- Overall, I really think this story highlights the dangers of innovation and who in the end has the most control over it. It presents a notion on how far can innovation go? Do we need to diversify and decentralize?
